This scene depicts an epic battle, set in a garden in the town of Patan.
Bairam Khan and his companions were trying to enjoy a leisurely boat trip
when they were ambushed by a group of no less than forty Afghans.
The Afghans were ready for battle, 10s of horse riding soldiers swarmed into the garden,
armed with long swords and bows and arrows.
With their Swords drawn, and horses blazing, the fight took hold,
causing much disturbance in the formerly peaceful garden.
This busy scene is contextualized with smaller people in the temple behind the wall of the garden.
The smaller scene contrasts with the main scene of the battle,
showcasing the importance of the battle and assassination while acknowledging there are other people out and about.
It is evident that the battle is causing a disturbance
as a man peeks out of a door to gaze upon the chaos.
The battle ensues throughout the middle of the scene and eventually your eyes draw downwards
to Bairam Khan and his assassin at the very bottom of the scene.
Bairam Khan was on a pilgrimage to Mecca, on the orders of King Akbar.
Akbar was unpleased with Bairam and sent him away on this journey.
Banishing him from the Mughal Empire, Bairam Khan knew that when he left on his pilgrim that it would be his last time in the kingdom.
However, he did not know that his last days in the Kingdom would be so closely followed by his last days on earth
His untimely death left behind a window and his 4-year-old son,
whom Akbar would end up caring for by marrying his widow and assuming responsibility of his son.
As our eyes are drawn down through the scene,
they focus on the boat with Bairam Khan’s former companions.
We can see the men looking to the left and to the right in confusion.
Attackers are coming from all around them.
One man in the boat throws his hands up in surrender as soldiers board their boat.
Perhaps he spotted that their leader, Bairam Khan has died and that the battle is lost.
The Three men in the very bottom of the scene are fleeing, the time has come to run.
Bairam Khan lays dead on the ground, red blood staining his bright yellow robes
The yellow is the brightest hue in the picture and therefore draws the eye to pinnacle of the scene.
Avenging his father's death, the assassin Mubarak Khan Lohani, looks up in glee over his enemy.
Wielding his sword above his head with excitement,
the assassin turns the other way perhaps ready to mount his horse and celebrate his victory.